NFC support for device engagement and data retrieval on Wallet Instance and Verifier App (RP) (#834)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/proximity-flow.rst

   Refer to:

   - Sec 8.2.2.3 for ``SessionEstablishment`` over BLE, and
   - Sec 8.2.2.5 for ``SessionEstablishment`` over NFC

**Step 9**: The Wallet Instance MUST compute the session key, as described in Step 7.

**Step 10**: Upon receiving the ``SessionEstablishment`` message, the Wallet Instance MUST decrypt it using the shared session key and MUST verify the Relying Party Instance's signature (mdoc reader authentication as specified in [`ISO18013-5`_ #12.5]) to ensure its authenticity.

**Step 11**: The Wallet Instance MUST decrypt the attribute request and MUST prompt the User for their consent to release the requested attributes. It MUST also display the contents of the Relying Party's Registration Certificate to ensure transparency about the requested attributes and its registered purpose.

**Step 12**: The User reviews the request and the Relying Party's registration information and then approves the presentation of the requested attributes.

.. admonition:: Box C

>    After receiving User approval, the Wallet Instance MUST retrieve the requested mdoc Digital Credentials. It then MUST prepare a ``SessionData`` message containing these Digital Credentials, and it MUST sign the required authentication data (as part of the mdoc authentication process, as specified in [`ISO18013-5`_ #12.4]). It MUST encrypt it using the established session keys before transmitting it to the Relying Party Instance over the secure BLE channel. The signing ensures device binding and data integrity. The mdoc response MUST be encoded in CBOR, with its structure outlined in [`ISO18013-5`_ #10.3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   After receiving User approval, the Wallet Instance MUST retrieve the requested mdoc Digital Credentials. It then MUST prepare a ``SessionData`` message containing these Digital Credentials, and it MUST sign the required authentication data (as part of the mdoc authentication process, as specified in [`ISO18013-5`_ #12.4]). It MUST encrypt it using the established session keys before transmitting it to the Relying Party Instance over the secure channel. The signing ensures device binding and data integrity. The mdoc response MUST be encoded in CBOR, with its structure outlined in [`ISO18013-5`_ #10.3].
```

**Step 1**: The Wallet Instance presents a QR Code to the Relying Party Instance. The QR code SHALL contain a URI with “mdoc:” as scheme and the ``DeviceEngagement`` structure specified in Section 9.1 encoded using base64url-without-padding, according to RFC 4648, as path.

Non-Normative Example with BLE as Data Retrieval
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Below is a non-normative example using the diagnostic notation of a CBOR-encoded ``DeviceEngagement`` that utilizes QR for device engagement and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) for data retrieval.

 .. literalinclude:: ../../examples/iso-device-engagement-BLE.txt
  :language: text

Non-Normative Example with NFC as Data Retrieval
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Below is a non-normative example using the diagnostic notation of a CBOR-encoded ``DeviceEngagement`` that utilizes QR for device engagement and NFC for data retrieval.

 .. literalinclude:: ../../examples/iso-device-engagement-NFC.txt
  :language: text

> **Step 2**: The verifier uses its Relying Party Instance to scan the QR code and retrieve the ``DeviceEngagement`` data from the mdoc. It SHALL select one of the transmission technologies from the ones provided in the ``DeviceEngagement`` structure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 2**: The verifier uses its Relying Party Instance to scan the QR code and retrieve the ``DeviceEngagement`` data from the mdoc. It MUST select one of the transmission technologies from the ones provided in the ``DeviceEngagement`` structure.
```

- Carrier Configuration Record provides the technical parameters needed actually to use that carrier. For NFC device retrieval transmission technology, it SHALL have the type “iso.org:18013:nfc” and the ID reference “nfc”. The binary content of the Carrier Configuration Record SHALL be encoded according to Table 1 of [`ISO18013-5`_ #9.2.2].

For example:
For NFC, this defines maximum APDU (Application Protocol Data Unit) command/response lengths; 
For BLE, it defines the Wallet Instance service UUID, characteristic UUIDs, MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit) size, and optional connection parameters; 
If early ``SessionEstablishment`` is supported, it also lists the TNEP (Tag NDEF Exchange Protocol) service name used to send the ``SessionEstablishment`` message during handover.

.. note::
   For the NFC device retrieval transmission technology, the contents of the Alternative Carrier Record and Carrier Configuration Record(s) SHALL comply with [`ISO18013-5`_ #9.2.2]. For the BLE device retrieval transmission technology, the contents of the Alternative Carrier Record and Carrier Configuration Record(s) shall comply with [`ISO18013-5`_ #11.1.2].

> - Auxiliary Data Record MUST carry the DeviceEngagement structure from the Wallet Instance to the Relying Party Instance as part of the auxiliary NDEF record in the Handover Select message. This record has the type iso.org:18013:deviceengagement , the ID reference “mdoc”, and uses the NFC forum external type format (0x04). For each Alternative Carrier record, the Auxiliary Data Reference SHALL point to the NDEF record containing the ``DeviceEngagement`` Structure. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Auxiliary Data Record MUST carry the DeviceEngagement structure from the Wallet Instance to the Relying Party Instance as part of the auxiliary NDEF record in the Handover Select message. This record has the type ``iso.org:18013:deviceengagement``, the ID reference “mdoc”, and uses the NFC forum external type format (``0x04``). For each Alternative Carrier record, the Auxiliary Data Reference MUST point to the NDEF record containing the ``DeviceEngagement`` Structure. 
```

> **Step 2**: The Relying Party Instance reads the Wallet Instance's Initial NDEF (NFC Data Exchange Format) message - , which contains a service parameter record for ``urn:nfc:sn:handover``, indicating the Wallet supports Negotiated Handover. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 2**: The Relying Party Instance reads the Wallet Instance's Initial NDEF (NFC Data Exchange Format) message, which contains a service parameter record for ``urn:nfc:sn:handover``, indicating the Wallet supports Negotiated Handover. 
```

**Step 3**: The Relying Party Instance sends a Handover Request to the Wallet Instance listing the supported carriers. 

**Step 4**: The Wallet Instance returns Handover Select constructed in response to the received Handover Request message. The contents of the Handover Select message is the same as Step 1.

.. note::
   Use of Negotiated Handover for device engagement allows negotiation of transfer methods. For BLE, it additionally allows negotiation of keys used by the transmission layer. This provides improved user experience and enhances the security of data transmission [`ISO18013-5`_ #9.2.1].

.. note::

>    Proceed only if ``DeviceEngagement`` Capabilities include ``HandoverSessionEstablishmentSupport = true``. Otherwise, skip early ``SessionEstablishment``. Early ``SessionEstablishment`` is sent via a dedicated TNEP service; the same ``SessionEstablishment`` SHALL also be sent again during data retrieval and must match—if not, the Wallet Instance terminates. If early ``SessionEstablishment`` fails to send, proceed as normal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Proceed only if the ``DeviceEngagement`` Capabilities include ``HandoverSessionEstablishmentSupport`` set to ``true``. Otherwise, skip the early ``SessionEstablishment``. The early ``SessionEstablishment`` is sent via a dedicated TNEP service; the same ``SessionEstablishment`` SHALL also be sent again during data retrieval and MUST match. If it does not match, the Wallet Instance terminates. If the early ``SessionEstablishment`` fails to send, proceed as normal.
```

**Step 5**: [Optional] Relying Party Instance opens the TNEP service named [urn:placeholder] with the Wallet Instance during the negotiated handover to deliver the early ``SessionEstablishment`` message.

**Step 6**: Relying Party Instance sends ``SessionEstablishment`` (e.g., ``EReaderKey`` + encrypted ``DeviceRequest``). Wallet Instance processes it; data retrieval has not started yet.

**Step 7**: Relying Party Instance closes the TNEP service.

.. note::

>    Suppose an optional ``SessionEstablishment`` message is sent during Negotiated Handover (Step 5). In that case, the Wallet Instance must verify that it matches the ``SessionEstablishment`` message received during Device Retrieval (using BLE or NFC secure channel). This verification is crucial for ensuring Session Binding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Suppose an optional ``SessionEstablishment`` message is sent during Negotiated Handover (Step 5). In that case, the Wallet Instance MUST verify that it matches the ``SessionEstablishment`` message received during Device Retrieval (using BLE or NFC secure channel). This verification is required to ensure a correct Session Binding.
```

    :caption: `Session Establishment over BLE. <https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/ZLHDRzim3BthLn2-r3aaG3PWXs8RYYu15c0PXcRfBhimCki8ioLDakNq5-r_x9UDabitmVeL184Zak_nFLA-y05TwDf6O1UCxjeTEI4idocfBEe0nGzi6WgmrIeKW1xwq_3LDrXfHj6ISZWAWJAeY84uTNpaupFuyDI7OvTVbY2DriGLHWCnvAvHVjyIivGtphImtQuMu4YIYbI1qh2Wg2J1KjTOKqgSF4iYTkO0HIBo53eBfJCDJR7MnhEUII40ullfn_uSblViC6JBpX78FN9xZI1T0IEz9EYQdBgvPKsEMmvWYHn4XR2gaY86SsmEvoHkAF_-cSzdyzdRsPldDMG9zn0aVq7PLaP2J6IAF8GzZPIEi2ANTV7Ns01N-MHeJKbCJdEapve_cTPsF2awM2vcWpFB48xdkVJntYCs7Pt08BirpccewLNOZz0ZCamFmDZbaBDMliKWznFuJgvLEktDwLfm3RlFl_0mXPXfYs93tdFAydXnYW8CM_FO54Nouwu6BfMkbAx5866TcdWQiULZthS7XLNdk1X-QlXAjGaAatkVKLUPEojFO_clZZTu4yZ2Ep4QiRxBUOKLoGXnDWndazn0yAhMZClCR9DqjpOruiXRepr1EIfQOC2Yc737kJb7lpk-Rwao1ATsl0L-z4s8YevkyT6VNbmmBRyx_W40>`_
    
**Step 1**: The Wallet Instance and Relying Party Instance establish a secure BLE connection [`ISO18013-5`_ #11.1]. The Relying Party Instance (central) connects to the Wallet Instance (peripheral) using the Wallet Instance service UUID provided by DeviceEngagement, then discovers services/characteristics, and enables notifications as needed.

> **Step 2-5**: [Optional] Wallet Instance initiates verification by preparing to check the Relying Party’s identity via the Ident characteristic - a BLE GATT characteristic that carries an identifier value as described in [`ISO18013-5`_ #11.1.3.2]. The Wallet Instance derives the expected Ident value. It reads the Relying Party's Ident characteristic, compares it to the expected Ident, and terminates the BLE connection if a mismatch occurs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 2-5**: [Optional] Wallet Instance initiates verification by preparing to check the Relying Party’s identity via the Ident characteristic, that is a BLE GATT characteristic that carries an identifier value as described in [`ISO18013-5`_ #11.1.3.2]. The Wallet Instance derives the expected Ident value and reads the Relying Party's Ident characteristic, comparing it to the expected Ident, and terminating the BLE connection if a mismatch may occur.
```

``SessionData`` over BLE
--------------------------
The following figure illustrates the low-level flow compliant with `ISO18013-5`_ for ``SessionData`` over BLE corresponding to Boxes C in Figure 8.10.

.. _fig_SessionData-BLE:
.. plantuml:: plantuml/session-data-over-ble.puml
    :width: 90%
    :alt: The figure illustrates the Session Data over BLE Presentation Flow in proximity.
    :caption: `Session Data over BLE. <https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/LO-n3i8m34JtV8ML2GP-W05L20Oa1aI5M5ZSr898hLjYfn5_Zs50PRjtT_B9bIWcpNtdCEl0kMyeEJUQ5qCSaHNy5RkE52uSrGCAbF_uV883snKEz8qdvp1ed539gZzfTbbjfZNKn2qWIBmpcJ0W3kargb4Y6GSMWeNtDOd4WNUewFqIRboYFgpnp2IVBggcs6GbWM6Y1DlZthcMPeCpAAwoMNlp3G00>`_

**Step 1**: The Wallet Instance sends the final APDU containing either the last block DeviceResponse (with requested attributes) or a status code, after which the session may end or continue with a new request.

``SessionEstablishment`` over NFC
----------------------------------
.. note::

>    If device engagement is initiated via a QR code, the Relying Party Instance has no standardised way to signal its intent to use NFC for subsequent data transfer. This could lead to a poor user experience, as the User might not be aware that they need to use NFC. This issue is avoided when NFC is used for the device engagement, as it implicitly establishes the data transfer method [`ISO18013-5`_ #8.2.5].

Reviewer 2: @RosaliaGaleano @ChiaLeo @steps88 @gaecapdtd ^

   The following figure illustrates the low-level flow compliant with `ISO18013-5`_ for ``SessionEstablishment`` over NFC corresponding to Box B in Figure 8.10.

.. _fig_SessionEstablishment-NFC:
.. plantuml:: plantuml/session-establishment-over-nfc.puml
    :width: 90%
    :alt: The figure illustrates the Session Establishment over NFC Presentation Flow in proximity.
    :caption: `Session Establishment over NFC. <https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/ZP9BJyCm383l-HLMJzjX9pWX3G6b20HxYF6uSCbIRutKE25nM_ZtE6n2GsWIjyJv77-ESv5OH-vSgtJ7dZgtngXKa9WrDcXYA5vrsoB3Crc6qVAkBCS5w0J3R-fn2NSabv51eShh7TGhfGtRNZDAmizImjCfWAkzWSiGMciqMq-mmXRDzsewLJrCpc4uWqL0sg7w07sZLVLGbKzWl7EQQZLal3-3lQxnjB7H9G57Ytlm4IpLEHaJE1yHQiqQsCC6sJJZRw6YM65ASdibZQnRcng7n4LnQ5EHYP-1iJvEHtplCF4RLVENwc6nh8uvHap1Kvt-g-W3mxucN6MMjcgOd8lLJ0jntCX9M6zH2XgqlRZNNPHaUHkOuzQprRcXMr7qFKOOB3V03VxDip8ZnW0dazFSp4TkPZJRKpERNFOOmnD6PobFUdvJvb7GRgmAvH5KZGT_uc3Jgmivbx_u1G00>`_

Definitions (Acronyms and Commands)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. list-table::
   :class: longtable
   :widths: 15 85
   :header-rows: 1

   * - **Acronym/Command**
     - **Description**

   * - **PICC**

>      - Proximity Integrated Circuit Card — the Wallet Unit acting as the NFC tag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Proximity Integrated Circuit Card, implemented by Wallet Units acting as a NFC tag.
```

   * - **PCD**

>      - Proximity Coupling Device — the Relying Party instance that drives `APDU` exchanges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Proximity Coupling Device, impletented by Relying Party instances using `APDU` exchanges.
```

   * - **AID**

>      - Application Identifier — unique ID used in SELECT `APDU` command to open the Wallet Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Application Identifier, unique ID used in SELECT `APDU` command to engage the Wallet Instance.
```

   * - **APDU**

>      - Application Protocol Data Unit — standard message format for communication between Relying Party Instance (PCD) and Wallet (PICC) consists of Command APDUs (e.g., `SELECT`, `ENVELOPE`, `GET RESPONSE`) from the reader and Response `APDUs` from the wallet, which include data and end with status words (`SW1/SW2`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - Application Protocol Data Unit, a standard message format for communication between Relying Party Instance (PCD) and Wallet (PICC) consists of Command APDUs (e.g., `SELECT`, `ENVELOPE`, `GET RESPONSE`) from the reader and Response `APDUs` from the wallet, which include data exhange and end exchange using status words (`SW1/SW2`).
```

   * - **SELECT APDU**
     - Command that opens the Wallet Instance by `AID`.  Response includes File Control Information (FCI) and Status Word (`SW1/SW2`).
  
   * - **ENVELOPE APDU**
     - Command that carries session messages (e.g., ``SessionEstablishment``).  Response indicates processing status (`OK` or `more data`).

   * - **GET RESPONSE APDU**
     - Command that retrieves additional response data when the Wallet signals "more data" is available (`SW1=61`).

   * - **SW1/SW2**
     - `SW1/SW2` (Status Words) — Two-byte status code at the end of every response.  Common values: `90 00 = success`, `61 XX = more data`, `6A 82 = file/application not found`.

> **Step 1**: The Relying Party Instance (PCD) sends a SELECT `APDU` command with the Application Identifier (`AID: A0 00 00 02 48 04 00`) to open the Wallet Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 1**: The Relying Party Instance (PCD) sends a SELECT `APDU` command with the Application Identifier (`AID: A0 00 00 02 48 04 00`) to engage the Wallet Instance.
```

     - *(array)*. Contains two mandatory values:

       - *(int)*. Cipher suite identifier. See Table 22 of `ISO18013-5`_.
       - *(bstr)*. Public ephemeral key generated by the Wallet Instance, used by the Relying Party Instance to derive the Session Key. The key MUST be of a type allowed by the selected cipher suite.

   * - **DeviceRetrievalMode-BLEOptions**
     - *(map)*. Provides options for the BLE connection, such as Peripheral Server or Central Client mode, and the device UUID. See Table 2 of `ISO18013-5`_ for the detailed mapping.
       
       If the Wallet Instance indicates during device engagement that it supports both modes, the Relying Party Instance  SHOULD select the mdoc central client mode  [`ISO18013-5`_ #11.1.3.1].
       
       Only present when performing device engagement using the QR code. Absent when using NFC to perform device Engagement.

   * - **DeviceRetrievalMode-NFCOptions**

>      - *(map)*. Provides options for NFC connections, including the supported role (PICC or PCD) and maximum PDU command/ response sizes. See Table 2 of `ISO18013-5`_ for the detailed mapping.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - *(map)*. Provides options for NFC connections, including the supported role (PICC or PCD) and maximum PDU command/response sizes. See Table 2 of `ISO18013-5`_ for the detailed mapping.
```
